London may face a coronavirus lockdown similar to those seen in other European
cities, as Boris Johnson warned the country he was prepared to take “further
and faster measures” to tackle the disease.

While Downing Street is understood not to be planning to impose more stringent
measures immediately, the prime minister said he would not hesitate to roll
out tougher action to protect people’s health and NHS services when necessary,
as officials reiterated the capital was ahead of other parts of the country in
terms of the virus’ spread.

London cases

In his daily press conference, Johnson said: “We’ve always said we’re going to
do the right measures at the right time.

“I think a lot of people are making a real heroic effort to comply with the
advice that we have given but as I’ve said tonight and in the past few days we
keep everything under continuous review and we will not hesitate to bring
forward further and faster measures where we think that is necessary.”

It emerged on Wednesday that the Cabinet Office had written to Whitehall
departments asking for their recommendations on stricter measures for the
capital, in a “shielding plan for London”, where 953 people have been
diagnosed with Covid-19 – nearly a third of the 2,626 UK total.

Johnson ended his briefing by repeating his warning that more stringent
measures were still on the table. He said: “Absolutely we do not rule out …
because it would be quite wrong to do so … we do not rule out taking further
and faster measures in due course.”

His remarks came as Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, suggested the
government was considering a far tougher strategy to deal with the
coronavirus.

She attends the government’s regular emergency Cobra meetings and said she
expected the UK government to announce “more stringent measures” for the
capital, where the disease is spreading at a faster rate than the rest of the
country.

Asked if he would introduce legislation to specifically reduce people’s
movements, Johnson said it was not a natural choice for a government that
valued liberty, but he ruled nothing out when the pandemic reached its peak.

One source with close knowledge of the capital’s response to the outbreak said
any plans were not imminent and had not been discussed with key organisations
who would have to be involved, such as the Metropolitan police, City Hall and
those handling London’s response.

London has the highest level of infection and that rate is being monitored
daily. The government is also getting daily figures on transport use in the
capital. The Guardian understands the latest figures show a sharp drop, since
the government urged people to stay home on Monday, with use of the tube
network down almost 50% on its normal level and bus use down almost 40%.

In some European countries including Italy and France, people have been
restricted to their houses and face a fine if they leave for any reason other
than to buy food, visit the pharmacy or go to their job if they cannot work
from home.

The British government has come under criticism for its failure to bring in
mandatory social distancing measures to slow the spread of the virus, with
Johnson saying on Monday only that people should avoid “non-essential
contact”.

One source at City Hall said there had been no word of immediate action from
No 10 on moving to far more strict measures on people’s movement.

“We’ve not been told anything at all about this yet, which would indicate
there’s nothing due immediately. But we are ready to take what action is
needed to protect the health of Londoners,” the source said.

Other sources said that with London confirmed as being more advanced than the
rest of the UK in the spread of the disease, the general expectation was that
new containment measures would be rolled out in the capital first.

Asked about the possibility of a lockdown for London, the prime minister’s
official spokesman said the measures to protect people from coronavirus would
be guided by scientific advice.

Symptoms are defined by the NHS as either:

  * a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
  * a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly

NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should **stay at home for at least 7
days**.  

If you live with other people, **they should stay at home for at least 14
days** , to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.

After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to
their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should
stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. **Even if it means
they're at home for longer than 14 days**.

If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is
pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them
to stay for 14 days.

If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much
as possible.

After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your
normal routine.

**If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature
returns to normal.**

If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do
not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after
the infection has gone.  

Staying at home means you should:

  * not go to work, school or public areas
  * not use public transport or taxis
  * not have visitors, such as friends and family, in your home
  * not go out to buy food or collect medicine – order them by phone or online, or ask someone else to drop them off at your home

You can use your garden, if you have one. You can also leave the house to
exercise – **but stay at least 2 metres away from other people**.

If you have symptoms of coronavirus, use the NHS 111 coronavirus service to
find out what to do.

_Source:NHS England on 23 March 2020_

Johnson said earlier this week that London was moving ahead of the rest of the
UK on the curve of the coronavirus’s spread and people should heed the advice
on social contact.

Powers under the 1984 Public Health (Control of Disease) Act could be deployed
in a lockdown scenario. It allows for individuals “to be kept in isolation for
their own safety”, the prime minister’s spokesman said.

The government is already expected to introduce emergency powers to shut
premises, restrict gatherings and scale back transport services.

On Wednesday evening Transport for London announced it would run a reduced
service “to enable London’s critical workers to make essential journeys”.

The Waterloo and City line will be suspended from Friday in response to
declining demand and staff availability.

And the night tube, London Underground’s 24-hour weekend service, is to be
closed with immediate effect. The service operates on Friday and Saturday
nights on the Northern, Central and Victoria lines, as well as parts of the
London Overground.

The move will help restrict non-essential travel to bars and restaurants, as
the prime minister contemplates a crackdown. It also comes among increased
staff anger at the risk of working on tube lines at night to serve passengers
ignoring public health advice to avoid gatherings.

The Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, urged Londoners to only use public transport
for essential journeys, he said: “People should not be travelling, by any
means, unless they really, really have to. Londoners should be avoiding social
interaction unless absolutely necessary, and that means they should be
avoiding using the transport network unless absolutely necessary … ensuring
the capital’s critical workers can move around the city will be crucial.”

